[Small matter of programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_matter_of_programming)

In software development, Small Matter of Programming (SMOP) or Simple Matter of Programming is a phrase used to ironically indicate that a suggested feature or design change would in fact require a great deal of effort; it often implies that the person proposing the feature underestimates its cost. Such underestimated costs are common during cost estimation, particularly near the beginning of a project. The Jargon File describes an SMOP[1] as:

* A piece of code, not yet written, whose anticipated length is significantly greater than its complexity. Used to refer to a program that could obviously be written, but is not worth the trouble. Also used ironically to imply that a difficult problem can be easily solved because a program can be written to do it; the irony is that it is very clear that writing such a program will be a great deal of work. “It's easy to enhance a FORTRAN compiler to compile COBOL as well; it's just a SMOP.”
* Often used ironically by the intended victim when a suggestion for a program is made which seems easy to the suggester, but is obviously (to the victim) a lot of work. Compare minor detail.

SMOP was among the "games" described in an article as paralleling the Games People Play identified by Dr. Eric Berne in the field of self-help psychology.[2] The game essentially consists of proposing seemingly simple adjustments to a design, leading to unexpected consequences and delays.