[Partial Views](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/mvc/views/partial)

> 类似UserControl

ASP.NET Core MVC supports partial views, which are useful when you have reusable parts of web pages you want to share between different views.

## What are Partial Views?

A partial view is a view that is rendered within another view. The HTML output generated by executing the partial view is rendered into the calling (or parent) view. Like views, partial views use the .cshtml file extension.

## When Should I Use Partial Views?

Partial views are an effective way of breaking up large views into smaller components. They can reduce duplication of view content and allow view elements to be reused. Common layout elements should be specified in _Layout.cshtml. Non-layout reusable content can be encapsulated into partial views.

If you have a complex page made up of several logical pieces, it can be helpful to work with each piece as its own partial view. Each piece of the page can be viewed in isolation from the rest of the page, and the view for the page itself becomes much simpler since it only contains the overall page structure and calls to render the partial views.

Tip: Follow the Don't Repeat Yourself Principle in your views.

## Declaring Partial Views

Partial views are created like any other view: you create a .cshtml file within the Views folder. There is no semantic difference between a partial view and a regular view - they are just rendered differently. You can have a view that is returned directly from a controller's ViewResult, and the same view can be used as a partial view. The main difference between how a view and a partial view are rendered is that partial views do not run _ViewStart.cshtml (while views do - learn more about _ViewStart.cshtml in Layout).


## Referencing a Partial View

From within a view page, there are several ways in which you can render a partial view. The simplest is to use Html.Partial, which returns an IHtmlString and can be referenced by prefixing the call with @:
html

@Html.Partial("AuthorPartial")

The PartialAsync method is available for partial views containing asynchronous code (although code in views is generally discouraged):
html

@await Html.PartialAsync("AuthorPartial")

You can render a partial view with RenderPartial. This method doesn't return a result; it streams the rendered output directly to the response. Because it doesn't return a result, it must be called within a Razor code block (you can also call RenderPartialAsync if necessary):
html

@{
    Html.RenderPartial("AuthorPartial");
}

Because it streams the result directly, RenderPartial and RenderPartialAsync may perform better in some scenarios. However, in most cases it's recommended you use Partial and PartialAsync.

