[Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/CSS/Getting_Started/Layout)

[Learn CSS Layout](http://learnlayout.com/)

##Size units

So far in this tutorial, you have specified sizes in pixels (px). These are appropriate for 
some purposes on a display device like a computer screen. But when the user changes the font size, your layout can look wrong.

For many purposes it is better to specify sizes as a percentage or in ems (em). An em is nominally 
the size of the current font (the width of a letter m). When the user changes the font size, your layout adjusts automatically.


##Text layout

Two properties specify how the content of an element is aligned. You can use them for simple layout adjustments:

[text-align](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-align)

Aligns the content. Use one of these values: left, right, center, justify

[text-indent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-indent)

Indents the content by an amount that you specify.

These properties apply to any text-like content in the element, not only to actual text. 
Remember that they are inherited by the element's children, so you might have to explicitly
 turn them off in the children to avoid surprising results.



##Floats

The [float](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/float) property forces an element to the left or right.
 This is a simple way to control its position and size.

The rest of the document's content normally flows around the floated element. You can control this by using the
 clear property on other elements to make them stay clear of floats.


``` css
ul, #numbered {float: left;}
h3 {clear: left;}
```

##Positioning

You can specify an element's position in four ways by specifying the position property and one of the following values.

These are advanced properties. It is possible to use them in simple ways—that is why they are mentioned in this basic tutorial.
 But using them for complex layouts can be difficult.

* relative

    The element's position is shifted relative to its normal position. Use this to shift an element by a specified amount. 
    You can sometimes use the element's margin to achieve the same effect.

* fixed

    The element's position is fixed. Specify the element's position relative to the document window.
     Even if the rest of the document scrolls, the element remains fixed.

* absolute

    The element's position is fixed relative to a parent element. Only a parent that is itself positioned with relative,
     fixed or absolute will do. You can make any parent element suitable by specifying position: relative; for it without specifying any shift.

* static

    The default. Use this value if you need to turn positioning off explicitly.

